- sometimes I tell the students imagine
that juggler with all these spinning
plates on these sticks did he succeed
the first time no they fell off why did
he succeed in the end to be in the
circus or in television with all these
hundreds of sticks with these plates is
spinning plates because he simply wanted
to he really wanted to succeed so he put
all his effort efforts and in the end he
succeeded that's the same thing for
portrait painting when teaching there is
a danger that people believe what you
say or it's a risk that people believe
what you say I don't want people to
believe me they have to find their own
truth imagine they go back start the
portrait and they remember been said you
should do this or that is forbidden
don't have black on your palette don't
work from photography you should do from
I don't trust teachers who forbid things
I think the main task of a teacher is
encourage you and stress on enjoy the
trip you don't put a handbrake on people
just let them go just let them go that's
where the energy is and what differences
do you find between working from life
and working from photograph working from
photograph the problem is that the
colors are already there the colors in
the four but mainly the colors if you
work from life model you see colors
changing and while there is a distance
because there is a distance between you
and the sitter
sometimes you you're not sure what color
you see so you you decide well this must
be green so you make it more greenish or
or grayish or bluish on the beard the
photo shows you exactly what color it is
so there is a temptation to copy the
photograph also with the wrinkles and
other features you
there is a danger that you you will copy
the photograph many portrait painters in
the past
Lucian Freud yes model so why do you
find it impossible yeah well you have to
think I am I portrait commissions is my
daily work so if you if you imagine that
you you go abroad with your easel and
your paint and you stay there for a
couple of days in the sitter's home
first of all the sitter doesn't have any
time they reserved some hours for me for
taking pictures but you can't think of
painting days in the sitter's home where
do you sleep well you nowadays that's
not a good idea
you are obviously very accomplished
portrait painter hmm
and you are also teaching how how does
does teaching complement your practice
well that's interesting when you paint
you you just paint you just you don't
think so much although your your concept
is thinking of the end of the painting
but there is no need to find words for
what you're doing and when you're
teaching you have to find words to
explain what you say what you do so it's
interesting because sometimes I think I
am teaching but I am the first one who
learn from my own words because finding
words for it then it comes becomes clear
for me as well so that's funny but
people ask me what do you think of hyper
realism and it's I for me it isn't my
style
I think the portrait or if it is it
realistic or is it more free more free
brush or ball brush strokes the it has
to tell the story a portrait has to tell
a story and these hyper-realistic that
you see all the wrinkles and all these
things which don't add
two more likeness it is like you tell a
story once upon a time in the Black
Forest you can clearly hear what I say
but is it a nice story no I want my
paintings to tell us so you once upon a
time in the Black Forest you can't hear
exactly what it's but it but it takes
you into the story and that's for me
what what a portrait must address
you